Oceana

Jump to navigation
United States
Europe
Chile
Canada
Belize
Philippines
Brazil
Peru
Mexico
International
Your Country

    About
    Publications
    Marine Life
    Support
    Blog
    Search
    Search form
    Search

Menu

    What We Do

    Our Campaigns

    Take Action

What We Do
Oceana is dedicated to protecting and restoring the world’s oceans on a global scale.
Our Vision

Oceana seeks to make our oceans as rich, healthy, and abundant as they once were.

Oceana seeks to make our oceans more biodiverse and abundant by winning policy victories in the countries that govern much of the world's marine life.

Oceana, founded in 2001, is the largest international advocacy organization focused solely on ocean conservation. Our offices around the world work together to win strategic, directed campaigns that achieve measurable outcomes that will help make our oceans more bio diverse and abundant.

Oceans cover 71 percent of the globe, and they are as important to us as they are vast. Our oceans are home to most of the life on our planet and play a central role in the world's natural systems, like regulating our climate and absorbing carbon dioxide. They provide livelihoods to countless fishermen and others around the world. They also feed hundreds of millions of people and have the capacity to provide a healthy seafood meal to a billion people, every day. Unfortunately, the oceans are in trouble — scientists report that the amount of fish caught from the oceans began declining — for the first time in recorded history — just a few decades ago. Fortunately, we know how to fix things. Science-based fishery management — which establishes science-based catch limits, reduces bycatch and protects habitat — is helping the oceans rebound and recover where it is established. Oceana is dedicated to advocating for science-based fishery management and restoring the world's oceans.

The Problem

The oceans are vast, but they are not immune to human influence. We have already altered or destroyed marine ecosystems and driven million-year-old species to the brink of extinction. According to a study published in Science, less than 4 percent of the oceans remain unaffected by human activity.​

01
We are taking too many fish out of the water.

Overfishing threatens ocean ecosystems and our livelihoods.

Download our Report on Wasted Catch
02
We are polluting our oceans.

Mercury, antibiotics, oil, and climate-changing gasses threaten marine wildlife, habitat, and human health.

03
We are squandering potential sources of food.

Seafood has the potential to sustainably feed millions of hungry people.

04
We are trashing marine wildlife and special places.

Destructive and wasteful fishing practices threaten animals and damage the seafloor.

Oceana’s Solution

Oceana was created to identify practical solutions and make them happen. The good news is that we can restore the oceans to their former glory. Oceana is…

Campaign-Driven

We channel our resources towards strategic, directed campaigns to achieve measurable outcomes that will protect and restore our oceans to former levels of abundance.

Learn About Current Campaigns
Fact-Based

We believe in the importance of science in identifying problems and solutions for the oceans.

Read Our Scientific Reports
Multi-disciplinary and expert

Our scientists work closely with our teams of economists, lawyers, communicators, and advocates to achieve tangible results for the oceans.

Meet Our Staff
The Perfect Protein

The Fish Lover's Guide to Saving the Oceans and Feeding the World

Oceana believes that wild seafood, when properly managed, can provide a delicious, nutritious, and renewable source of protein for millions of people.

Andy Sharpless, CEO of Oceana, together with his co-author, Suzannah Evans, reveals how eating more seafood is not only good for our health but can also help to save the planet. He explains how wild fish really are the perfect protein.

So can we be stewards of our oceans? Do we have the practical conditions we need to actually do this for our oceans? If the oceans are legal high seas in which no one is in charge, how can we possibly hope to implement ocean stewardship?

Learn more about the book
Petitions
Featured Campaign
Save the Oceans, Feed the World

We are restoring the world’s wild fish populations to serve as a sustainable source of protein for people.

Learn More
More Campaigns

    Protect Habitat
    Bycatch
    Plastics
    Marine Wildlife

View All
Campaigns
Featured Petition
Ask GrubHub to Take Shark Fins Off the Menu!

Sign our petition to tell GrubHub to take shark fin off the menu now – before the ocean’s most iconic predators disappear.

Take Action
More Campaigns

    Bycatch
    Ocean Pollution
    Plastics
    Marine Wildlife

View All
Show Your Support With a Donation

We have already protected nearly 4 million square miles of ocean and innumerable sea life - but there is still more to be done.
$10
$25
$75
$200
$500
Become a Wavemaker

Sign up today to get weekly updates and action alerts from Oceana.

Shop
Press Center
Employment Opportunities
Contact
Financials
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use

Regional Sites :
United States
Europe
Chile
Canada
Belize
Philippines
Brazil
Peru
Mexico

Find Oceana
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube

Tweet to Share Our Message

A great way to get involved in protecting #oceans: Join Oceana as a Wavemaker & sound off on important issues! http://ow.ly/HoEaH
Twitter


Ending Single-Use Plastics

How you can help save the oceans from plastic pollution
Join Oceana to end the plastics problem and save the oceans

Since you've been
on this webpage
4378

pounds of plastics
have entered the ocean
The Problem

The oceans face a massive and growing threat from something you encounter everyday: plastics. An estimated 17.6 billion pounds of plastic leaks into the marine environment from land-based sources every year—this is roughly equivalent to dumping a garbage truck full of plastic into the oceans every minute.

As plastics continue to flood into our oceans, the list of marine species affected by plastic debris expands. Tens of thousands of individual marine organisms have been observed suffering from entanglement or ingestion of plastics permeating the marine environment—from zooplankton and fish, to sea turtles, marine mammals and seabirds.

Plastics never go away. Instead, they break down into smaller and smaller pieces, which act as magnets for harmful pollutants. When eaten by fish, some of those chemical-laden microplastics can work their way up the food chain and into the fish we eat.

Plastics in our oceans threaten the viability of critical marine ecosystems, but marine plastic pollution is not just a problem for our oceans. The extent to which we, too, are being affected by the plastics that have become so ubiquitous in our environment—in our food, water and air—is a topic of extensive research.

Unfortunately, one of the most popular solutions to plastic pollution falls far short. A meager 9% of all plastic waste generated has been recycled. Recycling alone is not enough to solve the plastics crisis. To have an impact, we must reduce the amount of single-use plastic being produced at the source.

Oceana campaigns to do just that in strategic coastal countries that produce for more than 30% of the world’s plastic waste.

 
 
Solution

Solving the plastics problem in our oceans will ultimately take concerted action from companies, governments and advocates like you.
Companies

From multinational corporations to local restaurants – companies need to adopt alternatives to single-use plastics.
Government

At all levels, governments need to enact smart legislation and regulations that limit or eliminate single-use plastics and ensure they don’t end up in our oceans.
Consumers

Consumers have the most important role of all. Make your voice heard, and lead by example.
Oceana campaigns in eight countries and the European Union to achieve meaningful reductions in ocean plastic pollution by reducing the production and use of throwaway plastics.

   
Countries
Belize Map
Belize
Brazil Map
Brazil
Canada Map
Canada
Chile Map
Chile
Europe Map
Europe
Mexico Map
Mexico
Peru Map
Peru
Philippines Map
Philippines
United States Map
United States
Updates
Oceana diver holding a piece of plastic plate.
Oceana finds plastics in all marine habitats analyzed in its latest expedition

November 25, 2020

The organization has been on the Levante coast to document the presence of marine litter in the Mediterranean Despite the drop in tourism and the reduction in activity due to Covid-19, the presence of plastics in the sea is alarming An Oceana scientific expedition has documented plastics in all marine habitats studied during a week […]
plastic bag in coral reef
Plastics-Free Initiative Coalition has launched its own website

Miami's Community Newspapers, November 9, 2020
Ocean Plastic Pollution
Fort Lauderdale might ban plastic foam to help protect paradise

South Florida SunSentinel, November 6, 2020
Seabird with plastic
Scientific study estimates that plastic waste will exceed efforts to mitigate pollution from this material

November 4, 2020

Plastic pollution is a global environmental problem that threatens the biodiversity of our planet, affecting practically all marine and freshwater ecosystems.
Circular Economy: why opt for returnable packaging?

Inforegión, November 4, 2020
Victories
Ocean Plastic Pollution
Oceana Praises the Passage of New York’s Statewide Polystyrene Ban

April 2, 2020

Today, New York state lawmakers passed a ban on polystyrene in an effort to curb the endless flow of plastic into our oceans, rivers and lands. Effective January 1, 2022, the ban will prohibit the sale and distribution of disposable food service containers that contain expanded polystyrene foam, as well as polystyrene loose fill packaging […]
plastic bag in coral reef
Peru’s new law trashes single-use plastics

December 20, 2018

After almost a year of continuous debate, Peru has joined the global fight against plastic pollution. In a unanimous vote earlier this month, Peru’s Congress approved an ambitious national law to discourage and significantly reduce single-use plastics.
single-use plastic bag floating in the ocean
BELIZE WINS AGAIN! GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES PHASE OUT OF SINGLE USE PLASTIC AND STYROFOAM BY EARTH DAY 2019

March 1, 2018

Oceana Belize congratulates the Government and people of Belize on the decision announced today to commence the phase out of single use plastic shopping bags, Styrofoam and plastic food utensils by April 22nd 2019. This decision is welcomed by the thousands of Belizeans who have participated in numerous clean up initiatives country wide for many […]

