OceanConservancy
Main menu
Skip to primary content
Skip to secondary content

    Programs
    Protecting The Arctic
    Protecting The Arctic

    We’re dedicated to working with indigenous communities, legislators, scientists and people like you to advocate for science-based solutions to protect this fragile ecosystem.
    Learn More
    More Programs
        Confronting Climate Change
        Confronting Ocean Acidification
        Government Relations
        Protecting Florida
        Restoring the Gulf of Mexico
        Smart Ocean Planning
        Sustainable Fisheries
        Trash Free Seas
    Blog
    Take Action
    About Us


    Donate

    With the help of donors like you, Ocean Conservancy is developing solutions to save our ocean.
    Donate Now
    More ways to give…

Search for:
About Us
For the Love of The Ocean

    Overview
    History
    Leadership & Board of Directors
    Partners
    Experts
    Financials
    Newsroom

Our Mission:
Ocean Conservancy is working with you to protect the ocean from today’s greatest global challenges. Together, we create science-based solutions for a healthy ocean and the wildlife and communities that depend on it.
Janis Searles Jones

    What happens to the ocean impacts all of us.
    Janis Searles Jones CEO, Ocean Conservancy

See Our Work
Like all of us here at Ocean Conservancy, my love for the ocean runs deep.

The ocean has played a major role in my life since I was a kid. I still remember my first beach field trip with Mrs. Terwilliger, our community naturalist. I’ll never forget how she would show up in her pale blue VW bus to teach us about local wildlife, everything from bird calls to identifying snakes.

That first field trip will always stand out in my memory, when she taught us about the impacts of plastic on wildlife, and I felt like even though I was young, I could make a meaningful difference.  Her favorite message for children was, “ This is my country. Wherever I go, I will leave it more beautiful than I found it.”

Today, Ocean Conservancy works with millions of volunteers of all ages, from all around the world, on our International Coastal Cleanup—something we’ve been doing for more than 30 years. I participate every year, and now I’m the one teaching my daughter about the impacts of plastic on the ocean and all the amazing animals in it, and how she can make a difference.
The Ocean Is Inspiring

The ocean is at the center of who we are. Even if you’ve never seen the ocean, you’re touched by it every single day. It produces half the air you and I breathe every day, the food we eat and the water we drink.

You can’t help but be inspired by the ocean. From majestic whales to jaw-dropping waves, colorful coral reefs to graceful sea turtles, the ocean can capture your heart and soul like nothing else on earth.

This is what we’re fighting to protect. Because people and communities depend on the ocean every single day. I hope you’ll be just as inspired as I am to join us in that effort.
It’s Our Ocean

One of the things I’m most proud of at Ocean Conservancy is that we tackle the greatest global challenges facing our ocean today.

Even more, we focus on long-term solutions that promote a healthy ocean, abundant wildlife and thriving coastal communities.

What happens to the ocean impacts all of us. The ocean is our responsibility, but we can’t do it alone—we need to join forces with you and people around the world to keep our ocean and our coastal communities healthy and prosperous.

    “We all have an opportunity to do something that makes the world a better place from wherever we are.”
    Emily Woglom
    Executive Vice President, Ocean Conservancy

Emily Woglom
#OceanOptimism

We know we can make a positive difference for the ocean—after all, we’ve been doing it for over 40 years.

I have the privilege of working with some of the best and brightest in this field, and I know that each and every one of us is dedicated to finding solutions to the challenges our ocean faces today.

Our leadership in the world of ocean conservation is built on pillars of strong science, smart policies and engaged partners. That includes ocean advocates like you that help us push for effective ocean policies, international groups that work with us to reduce plastics in the ocean and over 600,000 volunteers, including my daughter and me, who are part of the International Coastal Cleanup.

    We keep it real.

    Every day we strive to tell real world stories, and listen to the experiences of people who depend on a healthy ocean and collect information on our coasts and ocean.
    We want to see change.

    The road to change lies at the intersection of effective strategy, robust science and many, many supporters like you.
    We advocate for our ocean.

    We have a laser-like focus on solutions, and having a clear end goal—a healthy ocean for you, our families and our generations to come—is integral to all of our work.
    We inspire people.

    Here at Ocean Conservancy, we’re a collection of people who love the ocean, our coasts, and coastal communities. We’re thankful for the opportunity to share this with you.

    I hope you’ll be a part of our work.

Become a voice for the ocean

Our ocean faces many threats like the onslaught of ocean trash, overfishing and ocean acidification. With the help of donors like you, Ocean Conservancy is developing innovative solutions to save our ocean. Thank you for your donation today.
Donate Today
Ocean Conservancy on Facebook
Ocean Conservancy on Twitter
Ocean Conservancy on LinkedIn
Ocean Conservancy on Instagram

    Newsroom
    Wildlife Facts
    We Are Hiring

Get ocean alerts on your cell phone:

Mobile alerts from Ocean Conservancy. Periodic messages. Msg & data rates may apply. Text STOP to 69866 to stop receiving messages. Text HELP to 69866 for more information. Terms and Conditions

© 2020 Ocean Conservancy

Ocean Conservancy, International Coastal Cleanup, Ocean Action Network, Trash Free Seas, Trash Free Seas Alliance and Rippl are registered trademarks of Ocean Conservancy.

    Privacy Policy
    Cookie Policy
    Legal Statement
    Contact

Contact us at 800-519-1541

Ocean Conservancy is a 501(c)3 – Tax ID #23-7245152 – Donations are 100% tax-deductible as allowed by law.

    Charity Navigator – Four Star Charity
    Charity Navigatior Four Star Charity
    BBB Accredited Charity
    BBB Accredited Charity
    Member of EarthShare (CFC #11436)
    Member of EarthShare (CFC #11436)
    Guidestar Seal of Transparency - Gold
    guidestar_bw_badge

Triple Your Impact on Giving Tuesday
Donate


Main menu
Skip to primary content
Skip to secondary content

    Programs
    Protecting The Arctic
    Protecting The Arctic

    We’re dedicated to working with indigenous communities, legislators, scientists and people like you to advocate for science-based solutions to protect this fragile ecosystem.
    Learn More
    More Programs
        Confronting Climate Change
        Confronting Ocean Acidification
        Government Relations
        Protecting Florida
        Restoring the Gulf of Mexico
        Smart Ocean Planning
        Sustainable Fisheries
        Trash Free Seas
    Blog
    Take Action
    About Us


    Donate

    With the help of donors like you, Ocean Conservancy is developing solutions to save our ocean.
    Donate Now
    More ways to give…

Search for:
Fighting for Trash Free Seas®
Ending the flow of trash at the source

    Trash Free Seas
    International Coastal Cleanup
        #CleanOn: ICC 2020
        CleanSwell
        Start A Cleanup
        Cleanup Reports
        More Ways To Help
        Partners
    Plastics in the Ocean
        Trash Free Seas Alliance®
        The Global Ghost Gear Initiative
        Urban Ocean
    Outreach & Education
        6 Degrees of Separation
        Skip the Straw
    Boating Community
        GoodMate for Boaters
        GoodMate for Marinas
        Marina Cleanup
    Wildlife Fact Sheets
    Take a Deep Dive
        Stemming the Tide
        The Role of Gender in Waste Management
        Threat Rank Report
        How to Redesign The Good Life
        Exploring Solutions to Ocean Plastics

SinaHaugg_BlueLight
Fighting for Trash Free Seas®

Have you ever walked along a beautiful beach and been surprised to find a piece of plastic at your feet? You might be even more surprised to learn that together with volunteers like you, we’ve picked up more than 220 million pounds of trash in the last 30 years. And the problem goes deeper than what you’re seeing on the beaches. Scientists estimate that more than 8 million metric tons of plastic is entering our ocean every year. If we don’t act now, there could be a pound of plastic for every 3 pounds of fish in the ocean within the next decade. Ocean Conservancy has been at the forefront of the trash free seas challenge for more than 30 years. Trash in the ocean has serious consequences for all of us, but there is hope. With your help, we can solve the ocean plastic crisis together.
338,001,875

pounds of trash collected since 1986
16,488,975

volunteers since 1986

At our International Coastal Cleanups, volunteers have picked up more than half a million straws and stirrers, making straws one of the top ten items on our annual list. Straws pose a real danger to animals like sea turtles, albatross and fish who can eat them. Take action today: SKIP the STRAW!

Add your voice to the sea of people taking a stand for the ocean. Sign the pledge now and when offered a straw, simply say ‘no thanks.’
Take Action
The Problem
Ocean trash affects the health of wildlife, people and local economies

Ocean trash affects the health of wildlife, people and local economies. Trash in the water and on the shore can be mistaken as food by wildlife, or entangle animals with lethal consequences. Plastic also attracts and concentrates other pollutants from surrounding seawater, posing a contamination risk to those species that then eat it. Scientists are studying the impacts of that contamination on fish and shellfish and as well as the possible impact it may have on human health as well.
Photo May 04, 12 11 13

    “Plastics now pollute all dimensions of our ocean from the sea surface to the seafloor, on remote beaches and in Arctic sea ice. The impact ocean plastics have on marine species is well documented, but increasingly scientists are concerned about the potential threat of plastics to species at the top of the marine food chain: humans.”
    Nicholas Mallos
    Senior Director, Trash Free Seas®, Ocean Conservancy

From plankton to whales, animals across ocean ecosystems have been contaminated by plastic. Plastic has been found in 59% of sea birds like albatross and pelicans, in 100% of sea turtle species, and more than 25% of fish sampled from seafood markets around the world.
Judie Hansen

    “Whether we work alone on a deserted beach or with a small group of our friends, we have the knowledge that we are part of a larger congregation. Our statistics join those of others in far off places we may never get to visit.”
    Judie Hansen
    Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, organizer of Oregon’s first statewide coastal cleanup in 1984. Excerpt from Hansen’s Preface in Cleaning America’s Beaches: 1988 National Beach Cleanup Results

Marine debris isn’t an ocean problem—it’s a people problem. That means people are the solution. Ocean Conservancy is committed to keeping our beaches and ocean trash free. For more than 30 years we have organized the International Coastal Cleanup, where nearly 12 million volunteers from 153 countries have worked together to collect more than 220 million pounds of trash. And we’re not the only ones who care about ocean trash: Every day, all over the world, concerned people take the problem into their own hands by cleaning up their local waterways.

Tackling the problem of plastic in the ocean begins on land. Reduction in plastics use, especially of single-use disposable products, and the collection and recycling of plastics in developing countries can help to reduce the amount of plastic waste that enters the ocean.
The Solution

Ocean Conservancy has been bringing together passionate ocean lovers and helping them contribute to a vision for trash free seas®.

    We mobilize the International Coastal Cleanup—the world’s largest volunteer effort on behalf of ocean health. This year’s International Coastal Cleanup is during the month of September 2020.
    We research and share key details about what’s trashing our ocean with the public, the scientific community and decision makers.
    We prevent trash from entering the waters by working with everyone from individuals to businesses to change the products, practices and behaviors that lead to ocean trash.

There’s Hope!
Ocean Conservancy is leading the way with practical solutions

    “It’s about people – people all over the world who care about the health of our planet and who put that care into action. It’s about cooperation and coalition, sometimes between the unlikeliest of groups who, setting aside their differing viewpoints, work together for a larger common goal.”
    1993 International Coastal Cleanup Results

Ocean Conservancy is taking bold action, working to stop the flow of trash at the source, before it has a chance to reach the water to choke and entangle dolphins or endanger sea turtles, or ruin our beaches and depress our local economies.

Ocean Conservancy is leading the way with practical solutions that:

    Empower people. We lead a movement of people taking concrete actions every day to protect our ocean. We’re bringing useful tips to people on every street corner, creek bed and coastal waterway to empower them to stop the flow of trash before it hits our shores.
    Strengthen the science. Ocean Conservancy is leading scientific work with business and academic partners to improve our knowledge of the ocean trash issue.
    Engage everyone in solutions. We can’t do this alone, so we’re bringing together leaders from industry, government, NGO partners and the scientific community through the Trash Free Seas Alliance® to bring systemic, durable solutions to the ocean trash issue.
    Promote good policies. Ocean Conservancy built support for the Marine Debris Research, Prevention, and Reduction Act and its companion bill in the Senate, the Trash Free Seas Act, to strengthen a national focus on marine debris.

At our International Coastal Cleanups, volunteers have picked up more than half a million straws and stirrers, making straws one of the top ten items on our annual list. Straws pose a real danger to animals like sea turtles, albatross and fish who can eat them. Take action today: SKIP the STRAW!

Add your voice to the sea of people taking a stand for the ocean. Sign the pledge now and when offered a straw, simply say ‘no thanks.’
Take Action

Preventing 8 million tons of plastics from entering the ocean every year is a BIG job! Want to help? Donate now to help bring trash free seas solutions to life. And, please consider making a monthly donation to support our ongoing work to keep our beaches and ocean trash free. We can’t keep millions of pounds of trash from our ocean without your commitment.
Donate Today
Recent Posts

    NOAA-MarineDebris
    To the Ocean Defenders in the U.S. Federal Government, with Gratitude
    November 25, 2020
    Meredith Moore,
    Reginald Paros,
    Sarah Cooley	
    A reef manta ray feeds in between a plastic soup.
    Stopping Ocean Plastic Pollution Starts with Us
    October 30, 2020
    George Leonard,
    Nick Mallos	
    photo-1537162998323-3d3675e0e87c (1)
    The Maldives is a Hot Spot for Tourists, Tuna and Ghost Gear
    October 28, 2020
    Guest Blogger	
    DSC00142
    Upcycle Your Halloween Costume
    October 26, 2020
    Robyn Stegman	