BahamasPlasticMovement
 
PLASTIC WARRIORS
Menu
Donate Now
Take Action
BPM19_121.jpg
ABOUT
B.P.M.

We envision a Bahamas where an engaged public has created a nation free of plastic debris.
MISSION & HISTORY.
HOW WE WORK.

After sailing across the Pacific Ocean in 2012 to study the Western Garbage Patch, Kristal Ambrose was inspired to spark a plastic pollution revolution in her home, The Bahamas. Her passion for the issue led her to develop and launch Bahamas Plastic Movement (BPM), a non-profit organization geared towards raising awareness and finding solutions to plastic pollution.

 

Bahamas Plastic Movement believes that through research, education, citizen science & policy change, we can create a healthy marine and terrestrial environment free of plastic pollution.

 

BPM’s mission is to build a community of education and activism around plastic pollution. By empowering Bahamians to contribute to hands on citizen science and environmental leadership, we aim to evolve mindsets and spark cultural practices that will be pivotal in executing changes at the policy level.

​

We envision a Bahamas where an engaged public has created a nation free of plastic debris.

​

​

​

​

1. RESEARCH | Understanding the detrimental role plastic pollution plays in our marine and terrestrial ecosystems are extremely important in the alleviation of the problem. By conducting scientific research we are able to quantify the extent of the issue within The Bahamas and create solutions that fit our model. Our  Plastic Beach Project seeks to quantify a baseline data set for plastic pollution within The Bahamas that would allow us to find solutions that fit our model.

 

2. EDUCATION | By building a community of education and stewardship around plastic pollution issues, we aim to provide accessible science opportunities for the next generation of environmental leaders.

 

3. CITIZEN SCIENCE | We connect people to the issue of plastic pollution through direct involvement in our scientific research projects. This hands on approach allows individuals to get a firsthand account of plastic pollution and inspires the next generation of  environmental stewards.

 

4. POLICY CHANGE | We encourage individuals, businesses and organizations alike to take ownership over their plastic waste and find opportunities to refuse, rethink, reduce, reuse, and recycle all plastics. We encourage lawmakers to implement policies that would institute proper recycling programs and provide product replacement opportunities for single-use plastic products within the country.
Heidi Johnson
Atlantis Aquarium
Ocean Ambassadors
Beach cleanup
Kristal 'Ocean'
PARTNERS.

Business Partners

​

Allen Exploration​

 

​

​

Non-Profit Partners

​

Algalita Marine Research and Education​

Cable Bahamas Cares Foundation​

Cape Eleuthera Institute​

Eleuthera Arts and Cultural Center​

Island School Outreach​

Johnson Ohana Foundation​

Lyford Cay Foundation​

One Eleuthera Foundation ​

Plastic Pollution Coalition​

Space 2 Create​

The Last Plastic Straw

Harbour Island Green School

5 Gyres

​
Outreach-01.png
imageedit_70_2353747412.png
JOF_Logo_2_color.png
CEI(1)-01.png
cablecares.jpg
10.png
1.jpg
imageedit_7_9236381307.png
imageedit_8_2702615328.png
imageedit_9_8036447387.png
Algalita.png
Lyford-Cay-Logo.png
imageedit_45_8188618216.png
5gyres-logo-rgb.jpg
Contact Us

We are a small team working from The Beautiful Bahamas and we would love to hear from you. To keep up with all things BPM and to receive the latest in plastic pollution news, connect with us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.

ADDRESS

Eleuthera, Bahamas
EMAIL

bahamasplasticmovement@gmail.com
Facebook

    Facebook logo

Twitter

    Twitter logo

Instagram

    Instagram logo

YouTube

    Youtube logo

© 2020 by Agoo Media

Back to Top
 
LEARN.

We envision a Bahamas where an engaged public has created a nation free of plastic debris.
THE PROBLEM.

Plastic! It's a gift and a curse. Its design, versatility and durability adds convenience to our lives, however its ingenious design makes it an inconvenience to our environment. Currently plastic is the most used material by volume used for industrial and commercial purposes. Unfortunately this everyday material has made it’s way into almost every environment, from terrestrial to the open sea and even the most remote shorelines around the world. An estimated 5.25 trillion pieces of plastic pollute the worlds oceans today.

​

The massiveness of the issue makes for a very difficult task to “just cleanup,” since much of the plastic pollution found in the oceans is dominated by small fragments of plastic. To address the issue of plastic pollution, awareness must be raised on its effects, especially in The Bahamas as our country highly susceptible to severe marine debris accumulations on our shorelines. Making smart lifestyle changes in regards to plastic materials such as single use items can make a huge difference. Check out this infographic to learn how to move away from plastic dependency.