ByeByePlasticBags
logo

    Home
    About
    Team
    Global
    Projects
    Store
    Media
    Contact

About
Bye Bye Plastic Bags is an NGO driven by youth to say NO to plastic bags.
VISION
We envision a world free of plastic bags and where the young generation are empowered to take action.
MISSION
Our mission is to empower people to do what is right through education, campaigns, and political meetings. Start making that difference one bag at a time.

Bye Bye Plastic Bags is a NGO since 2018 under Yayasan BUMI INDAH

Address: Jalan Raya Canggu 88, Banjar Tiying Tutul, Desa Pererenan, Kecamatan Mengwi, Badung-Bali
Registration: 060.1/2559/DINSOSNAKER
VALUES
Education
Innovation
Collaboration
Passion
Sustainability
Grit
Leadership
PILLARS OF FOCUS
Education

We cannot solve a problem that people are not aware of. BBPB raises awareness and educates about the harmful impact of plastic on our environment, animals and health while also sharing how to be part of the solution. Having spoken to over 20,000 youth and created 2 educational booklets aimed for elementary schools in Indonesia, education has a huge place in the heart of BBPB.
Showing Solutions

Allowing people to see different ways of being a part of the solution. We showcase a lot of these solutions through our hands on projects such as our Pilot Village program, River BOOM toolkits, Mountain Mama’s Social Enterprise as well as our campaign One Island One Voice.
Policy

Watch this video to understand more on our political status now.
Global

BBPB has become an national and international movement, inspiring the masses to act now. BBPB Teams have launched in over 25 locations across the globe and the Founders continue to share their message on stages around the world in front of global leaders.
Start Your Own BBPB Team
Spread the movement by starting your own BBPB team and help your community say NO to plastic bags.
HomeAboutTeamGlobalProjects Store MediaContact
SUBSCRIBE TO OUR NEWSLETTER

Keep in the loop with the goings on around Bye Bye Plastic Bags and our many projects and partners.
Email
SUPPORT US SUPPORTING THE PLANET

Our mission is funded 100% by awesome people like you! Any amount helps us clean beaches and the world.
© 2020 Bye Bye Plastic Bags All rights reserved
