TrashHero

    GermanEnglish

Trash Hero World

    About us
    Our Programmes
    Our Network
    Our Impact
    Donate
    Join us
    Contact us

About us | Our Mission

    MISSION
    ORGANISATION
    BOARD OF TRUSTEES
    HOW WE ARE FUNDED

The Trash Hero mission is to bring communities together to clean and reduce waste. We do this through:

    Action and Awareness. We pick up trash. Whether a cigarette butt on the sand, or 2000 km from a beach – if we see it, we clean it! And we motivate others to do the same. By spending a few hours together picking up trash, people gain a profound understanding of the consequences of being careless about waste.

    Education. We actively engage children through our multilingual kids’ programme, connecting environmental values with hands-on experience of the impact that trash has on the local and global environment. Adults also learn experientially, backed up with information and workshops provided by our volunteers.

    Sustainable Projects. We create long-term programmes that help communities to reduce and better manage existing waste, and strategies that will prevent future waste.

    Inspiration. We motivate people to become Trash Heroes in their everyday lives. With consistently positive messaging, and a philosophy of “small steps”, we remove the barriers to change. Participants have gone on to make their own heroic cleanups around the world.

We abide by the following principles:

    Be positive: we focus on solutions (not problems), the future (not the past) and on what is going well (not what is wrong or who is to blame).
    Be inclusive and neutral: we work independently, bringing communities together for one mission that benefits all.
    Show, don’t tell. Repeat: we lead by example, taking small easy steps which, when multiplied, can result in great change. With regular actions, the change becomes lasting.
    Think global, act local: our local chapters are the life-force of our movement. Trash Hero World provides training, support and materials but all activities are community-driven.
    Be transparent: our local chapters don’t take or make money through their activities. All programmes are run by volunteers and costs are covered by donations in kind (goods and services) from local sponsors, and any products are sold at cost, with publicly available receipts.

These principles are enshrined in our code of conduct, which every member of the global Trash Hero family pledges to follow.

Trash Hero believes that every one of us can be a Trash Hero.

Read more about our projects, and join our global movement today.
FOLLOW US

RESOURCES

    Resource library
    Educational videos
    Videos about Trash Hero
    Financial information
    Privacy Policy

SUBSCRIBE TO GET NEWS!
* indicates required
Email Address *
First Name
Last Name
Language
CONTACT US

Trash Hero World
Roman Peter
Hauptstrasse 32
6034 Inwil
SWITZERLAND
Non-Profit Registration Number: 1993507

▶ Best ways to contact us
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Cookie settingsACCEPT
Privacy Overview
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are as essential for the working of basic functionalit...
Necessary
Always Enabled


“We Clean. We Educate. We Change”

December 2013 to present

Trash Hero started in Thailand in 2013 as a movement with a group of like-minded individuals eager to do something about our local trash crisis. Organising weekly beach clean-ups, we educated volunteers about the effect that waste – and plastic in particular – is having on our environment.

Today, the organisation consists of 171 official chapters in Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Singapore, Czech Republic, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Georgia, Switerland, Holland, Germany, the United States and Australia. Our latest collected figures, until the end of June 2020, show 336,285 volunteers worldwide have participated in 10,535 cleanups, removing 1,653,661kg of garbage from beaches and cities. Event participants are sensitised to the global waste problem and are encouraged to return home and take a closer look at what they can do in their day-to-day lives.

Number of cleanups worldwide
10,535

Number of volunteers worldwide
336,285

KG of garbage collected worldwide
1,653,661
Trash Hero Water Bottles

December 2014 to present

Since the launch of the Bottles & Bags Programme, 99,929 reusable water bottles have been purchased. Every reusable water bottle that is bought represents one plastic water bottle that is not bought and then thrown away. And every time that bottle is refilled, at home or at one of our free refill points, that’s another plastic bottle that doesn’t end up in the trash.

Even assuming a use of once per day for a year (in practice the bottle can be used for life), that’s a huge amount of plastic waste that is not discarded into landfill or the ocean. In Southeast Asia, where bottled water is the norm (it is not safe to drink tap water), this is a clear and long term solution to reduce current plastic consumption.

We are continually raising funds to provide a sustainable bottle stock to our chapters, so they can expand the sales and refill network in their local communities. The chapters provide these bottles at cost to local businesses, reinvesting the proceeds in new stock for the future.

The businesses then sell the bottles for a small profit, while providing free drinking water refills to anyone with a bottle. The customer benefits from the refill network when out and about, and the business benefits from increased custom and exposure through our media channels and refill map.

In this way, consumers and businesses can be aligned in helping to keep our communities, beaches and seas cleaner and healthier. To date, 559 businesses in 49 different areas are participating across Thailand, Indonesia and Laos. From Chiang Mai in the North to Pattani down South, you can now travel in Thailand without having to use one single plastic bottle!

Want to know how to bring the Bottles & Bags programme to your business or community? It’s easier than you think.  Click here to find out how.

Reusable water bottles sold
99,929

Number of plastic bottles “saved”
36,474,085
Workshops that Make a Difference

In South East Asia, Trash Hero World assists local communities with waste management strategies , and organises awareness building workshops about waste pollution and responsible waste management in schools, cooperating with similar NPOs while advocating change on a political level.

In 2015 and 2016, Trash Hero Thailand was awarded the prestigious “Thailand Green Excellence Award”, which is intended to recognize and celebrate organisations who have made an outstanding contribution to growing Thailand as a sustainable destination.
Waste Management @Work

December 2016 to present

The “Trash Hero @Work” programme is aimed at businesses eager to reduce office waste. The programme was piloted with a company from Lucerne, Switzerland.

As a first step, all office waste on an average day is analysed in detail. One by one, steps are then taken to reduce waste to a minimum. Employees might all commit to using our stainless steel bottles, or use their own containers to pick up their lunches. Slowly but surely, employees can move towards implementing a zero waste philosophy and can see how small changes make a big difference.

The first company to implement Trash Hero @Work reduced their waste by 50% in just 6 months!
